.. Automatically generated Sphinx-extended reStructuredText file from DocOnce source
   (https://github.com/hplgit/doconce/)

.. Document title:

Scaling of differential equations
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

:Authors: Hans Petter Langtangen
:Date: Aug 14, 2015

Finding proper values of physical parameters in mathematical models is
often quite a challenge. While many has gotten away with using just
the mathematical symbols when doing science and engineering with pen
and paper, the modern world of numerical computing requires each
physical parameter to have a numerical value, otherwise one cannot get
started with the computations.  For example, in the simplest possible
transient heat conduction simulation, a case relevant for a real
physical material needs values for the heat capacity, the
density, and the heat conduction coefficient of the material. In
addition, relevant values must be chosen for initial and boundary
temperatures as well as the size of the material.  With a
dimensionless mathematical model, as explained in the section :ref:`sec:scale:diffu`, *no physical quantities* need to be assigned
(!). Not only is this a simplification of great convenience, as one
simulation is valid for any type of material, but it also actually
increases the understanding of the physical problem.

Scaling of differential equations is basically a simple mathematical
process, consisting of the chain rule for differentiation and some
algebra.  The *choice of scales*, however, is a non-trivial topic,
which may cause confusion among practitioners without extensive
experience with scaling.  How to choose scales is unfortunately not
well treated in the literature. Most of the times, authors just state scales
without proper motivation. The choice of scales is highly
problem-dependent and requires knowledge of the characteristic
features of the solution or the physics of the problem.  The present
document aims at explaining "all nuts and bolts" of the scaling
technique, including choice of scales, the algebra, the
interpretation of dimensionless parameters in scaled models,
and how scaling
impacts software for solving differential equations.

Traditionally, scaling was mainly used to identify small parameters in
mathematical models, such that perturbation methods based on series
expansions in terms of the small parameters could be used as an
approximate solution method for differential equations.  Nowadays, the
greatest practical benefit of scaling is related to running numerical
simulations, since scaling greatly simplifies the choice of values for
the input data and makes the simulations results more widely
applicable.  The number of parameters in scaled models may be much
less than the number of physical parameters in the original model. The
parameters in scaled models are also dimensionless and express
*ratios* of physical effects rather than the levels of individual
effects.  Setting meaningful values of a few dimensionless numbers is
much easier than determining physically relevant values for the
original physical parameters.

Another great benefit of scaling is the physical insight that follows
from dimensionless parameters. Since physical effects enter the
problem through a few dimensionless groups, one can from these
groups see how different effects compete in their
impact on the solution. Ideally, a good physical understanding should
provide the same insight, but it is not always easy to "think right"
and realize how spatial and temporal scales interact with physical
parameters.  This interaction becomes clear through the dimensionless
numbers, and such numbers are therefore a great help, especially for
students, in developing a correct physical understanding.

Since we have a special focus on scaling related to numerical simulations,
the document contains a lot of examples on how to program with
dimensionless differential equation models. Most numerical models feature
quantities with dimension, so we show in particular how to utilize such
existing models to solve the equations in the associated scaled model.

Scaling is not a universal mathematical technique as the details
depend on the problem at hand. We therefore present scaling in a range
of specific applications, starting with simple ODEs, progressing with
basic PDEs, before attacking more
complicated models, especially from fluid mechanics.

The section :ref:`scale:dimunit` discusses units and how to make programs
that can automatically take care of unit conversion (the most frequent
mathematical mistake in industry and science?).  The section :ref:`sec:scale:decay` introduces the mathematics of scaling and the
thinking about scales in a simple ODE problems modeling exponential
decay. The ideas are generalized to nonlinear ODEs and to systems of
ODEs.  Another ODE example on mechanical vibrations is treated in
the section :ref:`sec:scale:vib`, where we cover many different physical
contexts and different choices of scales.  Scaling the standard, linear
wave equation is the topic of the section :ref:`sec:scale:wave`, with
discussion of how boundary and initial conditions can influence the
choice of scales.  Another PDE example, the diffusion equation,
appears in the section :ref:`sec:scale:diffu`. Here we progress from a
simple linear diffusion equation in 1D to the impact on scales of an
oscillating boundary condition and to nonlinear diffusion models.  The
final sections are devoted to many famous
PDEs arising from continuum models: elasticity, viscous fluid flow,
thermal convection, etc.

Especially experimental fluid mechanics is full of relations involving
dimensionless numbers such as the Grashof number and the Prandtl
number, but none of the textbooks the author has seen explain how
these numbers actually relate to dimensionless forms of the governing
equations. Consequently, this non-trivial topic is particularly
highlighted in our fluid mechanics examples.

To conclude, the purpose of this document is to demystify the
technique and thinking about scaling differential equations and
motivate for always bringing a differential equation model on
dimensionless form before doing numerical simulations.

